[Marketplace] Initial version (#2)
codex-storage/codex-spec: specs/marketplace.md

    │       │         Proof missed                               │
    │       └─────────────────────────► After some time slashed  │
    │                                   eventually Slot freed    │
    │                                                            │
    └────────┬─┬─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
             │ │                                      ▲           
             │ │                                      │           
             │ │ SP kicked out and Slot freed ┌───────┴────────┐  
All good     │ ├─────────────────────────────►│ Repair process │  
Time ran out │ │                              └────────────────┘  
             │ │                                                  
             │ │ Too many Slots freed         ┌────────┐          
             │ └─────────────────────────────►│ Failed │          
             ▼                                └────────┘          
       ┌──────────┐                                               
       │ Finished │                                               
       └──────────┘                                               
```

> ![image](./images/storeRequest.png)

Reviewer: Perhaps this should also be ascii (my preference), or the other way around the above diagram reworked to be consistent.

Author: Ufff you are right, but man I am not thrilled about reworking this 🙈

Author: Tracking it here: https://github.com/codex-storage/codex-spec/pull/2#discussion_r1727675035

## Client role

The Client role represents nodes that introduce data to be persisted inside the Codex network. 

There are two parts of a client role:

 - Requesting storage from the network by creating a storage request.
 - Withdrawing funds from storage requests.

### Creating storage requests

When the user prompts the client node to create a storage request, 
it SHOULD receive the input parameters for the storage request from the user. 

To create a request to persist a dataset on the Codex network,
client nodes MUST split the dataset into data chunks, $(c_1, c_2, c_3, \ldots, c_{n})$.
Using an erasure coding technique and input parameters, the data chunks are encoded and placed into separate slots.

> The erasure coding technique MUST be the [Reed-Soloman algorithm](https://hackmd.io/FB58eZQoTNm-dnhu0Y1XnA). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The erasure coding technique MUST be the [Reed-Solomon algorithm](https://hackmd.io/FB58eZQoTNm-dnhu0Y1XnA). 
```

Author: Great catch, thanks!

# Codex Marketplace Spec

---
title: CODEX-MARKETPLACE
name: Codex Storage Marketplace
status: raw
tags: codex
editor: Dmitriy <dryajov@status.im>
contributors:
- Mark <mark@codex.storage>
- Adam <adam.u@status.im>

> - Eric <ericmastro@status.im>

Author: ```suggestion
- Eric <eric@codex.storage>
```

`reward`

- It MUST be an amount of tokens offered per slot per second.
- The Ethereum address that submits the `requestStorage()` transaction MUST have [approval](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/api/token/erc20#IERC20-approve-address-uint256-) for transfer of at least the same amount on the ERC20 based token, that the network uses. 

`collateral`

- Amount of tokens that the storage providers submit when they fill slots.
- Collateral is then slashed or forfeited if the storage providers fail to provide the service requested by the Request (more information bellow).

`proofProbability`

Determines the inverse probability that a proof is required in a period: $\frac{1}{proofProbability}$

- Storage providers are required to provide proofs of storage to the marketplace smart contract when they are prompted to by the smart contract.
- The frequency is stochastic in order to prevent hosts from only coming online when proofs are required, but it is affected by this parameter.

`expiry`

- The parameter is specified as duration in seconds, hence the final deadline timestamp is calculated at the moment when the transaction is mined. 

`nonce`

> - It SHOULD be a random byte array.

Author: I would leave that out. This is handled by the type system, so IMHO it is not necessary.

#### Renewal of Storage Request

It should be noted that Marketplace does not support extending Requests. It is REQUIRED that if the user wants to 
extend the Request's duration, somebody submits a new Request transaction with the same CID **well before the original
Request finishes**. In this way, the data will be still persisted in the network at the time when new (or the current) storage providers 

> need to retrieve the dataset to fill slots of the new Request.

Author: That is something I was trying to do, yes.

### Withdrawing funds

The client node SHOULD monitor the status of Requests that it created. When Request reaches states `Cancelled` (not all slots filled after `expiry` timeout)
the client node SHOULD initiate withdrawal of the remaining funds from the contract using function `withdrawFunds(requestId)`.

>  - `Cancelled` state MAY be detected using timeout specified from function `requestExpiresAt(requestId)` **and** not detecting emitted `RequestFulfilled(requestId)` event.

Author: ```suggestion
- The `Cancelled` state MAY be detected using the timeout specified from function `requestExpiresAt(requestId)` **and** not detecting the emitted `RequestFulfilled(requestId)` event.
```

The `RequestCancelled` is emitted from `withdrawFunds` when the client actually call it, so client can not use that event for detecting cancelled request ;-)

 - `Failed` state MAY be detected using `RequestFailed(requestId)` event emitted from the smart contract.
 - `Finished` state MAY be detected by setting timeout specified from function `getRequestEnd(requestId)`.

## Storage Provider role

Storage Provider (SP) role represents nodes that persist data across the network by hosting Slots of Requests 

> that Client nodes requested.

Author: I know, but this is the start of the chapter that discuss the SPs, so I would like to have it "redefined" here just in case somebody jumps directly to here and then he wonders what "SP" means ;-)

> Storage Provider (SP) role represents nodes that persist data across the network by hosting Slots of Requests 
> that Client nodes requested.

Author: ```suggestion
Storage Provider (SP) role represents nodes that persist data across the network by hosting Slots of Requests 
that the Client nodes requested.
```

There are several parts to hosting a slot:

 - Filling a slot
 - Proving
 - Repairing a slot
 - Collecting Request's reward and collateral

### Filling slot

When new Request is created `StorageRequested(requestId, ask, expiry)` event is emitted with following properties: 

 - `requestId` - ID of Request.
 - `ask` - Specification of Request parameters. For details see above.
 - `expiry` - Unix timestamp that specifies when the Request will be cancelled if all slots are not filled by then.

It is then up to the Storage Provider node to decide based on the emitted parameters if it wants to participate in the 
Request and try to fill its slot(s). This decision SHOULD be done based on parameters specified by the node operator.

> If the node decides to ignore this Request, no action is necessary. If the node wants to try to fill a a slot, then 

Reviewer 2: After reading further below, I think maybe you were trying to illustrate that an SP should make decisions to fill a slot based on its Availabilities? Should we maybe include Availabilities in this spec?

> If the node decides to ignore this Request, no action is necessary. If the node wants to try to fill a a slot, then 

Author: Rephrased it 👍

 
 - Parameters:
   - `requestId` - ID of the Request.
   - `slotIndex` - Index that the node is trying to fill.
   - `proof` - `Groth16Proof` proof structure, generated over the slot's data.
 - The Ethereum address of the node from which the transaction originates MUST have [approval](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/api/token/erc20#IERC20-approve-address-uint256-) for transfer of at least the amount required as collateral for the Request on the ERC20 based token, that the network utilizes.

If the proof is invalid, or the slot was already filled by another node, then the transaction
will revert, otherwise a `SlotFilled(requestId, slotIndex)` event is emitted. If the transaction is successful, then the
node SHOULD transition into a __proving__ state as it will need to submit proof of data possession when prompted by the
contract.

It should be noted that if the node sees the `SlotFilled` emitted for slot that he is downloading the dataset or 
generating proof for, then node SHOULD stop and choose different non-filled slot to try to fill as the chosen slot
was filled by other node.

### Proving

> Once a node fills a slot, it MUST periodically, yet non-deterministically provide proof to the smart contract that it 
> stores the data it should. Nodes SHOULD detect that a proof is required using the `isProofRequired(slotId)` or that it will
> be required using the `willProofBeRequired(slotId)` in case the node is in [downtime](https://github.com/codex-storage/codex-research/blob/41c4b4409d2092d0a5475aca0f28995034e58d14/design/storage-proof-timing.md).

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to specify periodicity and non-determinicity, as these are defined by the contract. The node only needs to submit proofs to the contract when challenges are issued to the node by the contract.

```suggestion
Once a node fills a slot, it MUST submit proofs to the smart contract when a challenge is issued by the contract.  Nodes SHOULD detect that a proof is required for the current period using the `isProofRequired(slotId)` function,  or that it will
be required using the `willProofBeRequired(slotId)` function in the case that the [pointer is in downtime](https://github.com/codex-storage/codex-research/blob/41c4b4409d2092d0a5475aca0f28995034e58d14/design/storage-proof-timing.md).
```

Once a node knows it has to provide a proof it MUST get the proof challenge using `getChallenge(slotId)` which then

> NEEDS to be incorporated into the proof generation as described in Proving RFC (**TODO: Proving RFC**).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
needs to be incorporated into the proof generation as described in Proving RFC (**TODO: Proving RFC**).
```
Needs is not a keyword from RFC2119. Maybe replace with MUST or leave as needs.

> When the proof is generated it MUST be submitted with a transaction calling `submitProof(slotId, proof)` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the proof is generated, it MUST be submitted with a transaction calling the `submitProof(slotId, proof)` function.
```

#### Slashing

> There is a slashing scheme in place that is orchestrated by the smart contract to incentivize correct behavior
> and proper proof submissions by the storage provider nodes. This scheme is configured on smart contract level and is 
> the same for all the participants in the network. The concrete values of this scheme can be obtained by `getConfig()` contract call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a slashing scheme in place that is orchestrated by the smart contract to incentivise correct behaviour
and proper proof submissions by the storage provider nodes. This scheme is configured on the smart contract level and is 
the same for all the participants in the network. The concrete values of this scheme can be obtained by the `getConfig()` contract call.
```

> The slashing works in the following way:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Slashing works in the following way:
```

 - Node MAY miss at most `config.collateral.slashCriterion` proofs before it is slashed.
 - It is then slashed `config.collateral.slashPercentage` percentage **of the originally asked collateral** (hence the slashing amount is always the same for the given request).

>  - If the number of times the node was slashed reaches above `config.collateral.maxNumberOfSlashes`, then the slot is freed, the remaining of node's collateral is burned and the slot is offered to other nodes for repair. The Contract also emits the `SlotFreed(requestId, slotIndex)` event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - If the number of times the node was slashed reaches above `config.collateral.maxNumberOfSlashes`, then the slot is freed, the remainder of the node's collateral is burned, and the slot is offered to other nodes for repair. The Contract also emits the `SlotFreed(requestId, slotIndex)` event.
```

If the number of concurrent freed slots reaches above the `request.ask.maxSlotLoss`, then the dataset is assumed to be lost and the Request is failed. 
The collateral of all the nodes that hosted Request's slots is burned and the event `RequestFailed(requestId)` is emitted.

### Repair

When a slot is freed because of too many missed proofs, which SHOULD be detected by listening on the `SlotFreed(requestId, slotIndex)` event, then
storage provider node can decide if it wants to participate in the repairing of the slot. The node SHOULD, similar to filling a slot,

> consider the node's operator configuration when making the decision. The storage provider node that originally hosted

Reviewer 2: What is meant by `node's operator configuration` here? Availabilities? Or disk/CPU/bandwidth? Or both?

Author: Yeah something like availabilities.

> the freed slot MAY also participate in the data repair, but my refilling the slot it **won't** recover its original collateral

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the freed slot MAY also participate in the data repair, but by refilling the slot it **won't** recover its original collateral
```

and needs to submit new collateral with the `fillSlot()` call.

The repair process is the same as with the filling slots. If the original slot's dataset is not present in the network
the node MAY use the erasure coding to reconstruct the original slot's dataset. 
As this requires retrieving more data of the dataset from the network, the node that will successfully repair

> slot by filling the freed slot will be granted an additional reward. (**TODO: Implementation**)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the slot by filling the freed slot will be granted an additional reward. (**TODO: Implementation**)
```

The repair process is then as follows:

> 1. Node detects `SlotFreed` event and decide to repair it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Node detects a `SlotFreed` event and decides to repair it.
```

> 1. Node MUST download the required chunks and MUST use the [Reed-Soloman algorithm](https://hackmd.io/FB58eZQoTNm-dnhu0Y1XnA) to reconstruct the original slot's data.
> 1. Node MUST generate proof over the reconstructed data.
> 1. Node MUST submit transaction with call to `fillSlot()` with the same parameters and collateral allowance as described in the [Filling slot](#filling-slot).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Node MUST download the required dataset CIDs and MUST use the [Reed-Soloman algorithm](https://hackmd.io/FB58eZQoTNm-dnhu0Y1XnA) to reconstruct the original slot's data.
1. Node MUST generate a proof over the reconstructed data and challenge from the smart contract.
1. Node MUST submit a transaction with a call to `fillSlot()` with the same parameters and collateral allowance, as described in [Filling slot](#filling-slot).
```

### Collecting funds

> A Storage Provider node SHOULD monitor Requests and slots it hosts. 
> 
> When a node slot's Requests reaches states `Cancelled`, `Finished` or `Failed` it SHOULD call the contract's `freeSlot(slotId)` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Storage Provider node SHOULD monitor Requests of the slots it hosts. 

When a Request reaches the `Cancelled`, `Finished` or `Failed` state, it SHOULD call the contract's `freeSlot(slotId)` function.
```

These states can be detected using:

>  - `Cancelled` state MAY be detected by setting timeout using `expiry` **and** not detecting `RequestFulfilled(requestId)` event. There is also `RequestCancelled` event emitted, but the node SHOULD NOT use it for asserting expiry as it is not guaranteed to be emitted at the time of expiry.
>  - `Finished` state MAY be detected by setting timeout specified from function `getRequestEnd(requestId)`.
>  - `Failed` state MAY be detected by listening to the `RequestFailed(requestId)` event emitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - `Cancelled` state MAY be detected by setting a timeout using `expiry` **and** not listening for the `RequestFulfilled(requestId)` event. There is also a `RequestCancelled` event emitted, but the node SHOULD NOT use it for asserting expiry as it is not guaranteed to be emitted at the time of expiry.
 - `Finished` state MAY be detected by setting a timeout specified from function `getRequestEnd(requestId)`.
 - `Failed` state MAY be detected by listening for the `RequestFailed(requestId)` event.
```

For each of these states, different funds are collected:

> - For `Cancelled` the collateral is returned together with proportional payout based on time that the node actually hosted the dataset before expiry was reached.
> - For `Finished` the full reward for hosting the slot together with collateral is gathered.
> - For `Failed` no funds are collected as reward is returned to the client and collateral is burned, but this call removes the slot from the `mySlots()` tracking.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For `Cancelled`, the collateral is returned together with the proportional payout based on the time that the node actually hosted the dataset before expiry was reached.
- For `Finished`, the full reward for hosting the slot, together with the collateral, is gathered.
- For `Failed`, no funds are collected as the reward is returned to the client and the collateral is burned. This call also removes the slot from the `mySlots()` tracking.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- For `Cancelled`, the collateral is returned together with the proportional payout based on the time that the node actually hosted the dataset before expiry was reached.
	- For `Finished`, the full reward for hosting the slot, together with the collateral, is gathered.
	- For `Failed`, no funds are collected as the reward is returned to the client and the collateral is burned, but this call removes the slot from the `mySlots()` tracking.
```

I would leave "the but" because it is mainly about it, not the other parts.

## Validator role

> Validator role represents nodes that help to verify that the Storage Provider nodes submit proofs when they are required.  
> The decision maker around if proof was missed or not is the smart contract, validator only triggers the decision-making
> function on the smart contract. This is because in a blockchain we cannot act on things that **do not happen** and somebody needs to create a transaction 
> in order for the smart contract to act on it. The validator nodes get then rewarded for each time they correctly
> mark proof as missing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Validator role represents nodes that help to verify that SP nodes submitted proofs when they were required.  
The smart contract decides whether or not a proof was missed, while the validator triggers the decision-making
function in the smart contract. This is because in a blockchain, a contract cannot change its state without a transaction and gas initiating the state change. The validator nodes then get rewarded for each time they correctly
mark a proof as missing.
```

> Validator nodes MUST observe the slot's space by listening on the `SlotFilled` event, which SHOULD prompt the validator
> to add the slot to the watched slots. Then after the end of every period a validator has at most `config.proofs.timeout` seconds
> (config can be retrieved with `getConfig()`) to validate all the slots and if it finds a slot that missed its proof, then 
> it SHOULD submit transaction with call to the function `markProofAsMissing(slotId, period)` that validates the correctness
> and if right, will reward the validator with a reward.
> 
> Validator MAY decide to validate only part of the slot's space when it detects that it can't keep up validating slots
> before the end of validation `timeout`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Validator nodes MUST observe the slot's space by listening for the `SlotFilled` event, which SHOULD prompt the validator
to add the slot to the watched slots. Then after the end of every period, a validator has at most `config.proofs.timeout` seconds
(config can be retrieved with `getConfig()`) to validate all the slots. If it finds a slot that missed its proof, then 
it SHOULD submit a transaction calling the function `markProofAsMissing(slotId, period)`. This function validates the correctness of the claim,
and if right, will send a reward to the validator.

A Validator MAY decide to validate only part of the slot's space when it detects that it can't validate all watched slots
before the end of the validation `timeout`.
```

    │       │         Proof missed                               │
    │       └─────────────────────────► After some time slashed  │
    │                                   eventually Slot freed    │
    │                                                            │
    └────────┬─┬─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
             │ │                                      ▲           
             │ │                                      │           
             │ │ SP kicked out and Slot freed ┌───────┴────────┐  
All good     │ ├─────────────────────────────►│ Repair process │  
Time ran out │ │                              └────────────────┘  
             │ │                                                  
             │ │ Too many Slots freed         ┌────────┐          
             │ └─────────────────────────────►│ Failed │          
             ▼                                └────────┘          
       ┌──────────┐                                               
       │ Finished │                                               
       └──────────┘                                               
```

> ![image](./images/request-contract.png)

Reviewer 4: Yes, good idea, let's use Jimmy's version.

Using an erasure coding technique and input parameters, the data chunks are encoded and placed into separate slots.
The erasure coding technique MUST be the [Reed-Soloman algorithm](https://hackmd.io/FB58eZQoTNm-dnhu0Y1XnA). 
The final slot's roots and other metadata MUST be placed into Manifest (**TODO: Manifest RFC**). Manifest's CID MUST then 
be used as the `cid` of the stored dataset.

After the dataset is prepared, node MUST submit a transaction with the desired request parameters which are represented
as `Request` object and its sub-objects to function `requestStorage(request)`. Bellow are described its properties:

```solidity
struct Request {
  // The Codex node requesting storage
  address client;

  // Ask describing parameters of Request
  Ask ask;
  
  // Content describing the dataset that will be hosted with the Request
  Content content;

  // Timeout in seconds during which all the slots have to be filled, otherwise Request will get cancelled
  uint256 expiry;

  // Random value to differentiate from other requests of same parameters
  byte32 nonce;
}
  
struct Ask {
  // Amount of token that will be awarded to storage providers for finishing the storage request.

>   // Reward is per slot per second.

Author: I would go with the "Or change the spec when we change the implementation?" route.

 - `Finished` state MAY be detected by setting timeout specified from function `getRequestEnd(requestId)`.

## Storage Provider role

Storage Provider (SP) role represents nodes that persist data across the network by hosting Slots of Requests 
that Client nodes requested.

There are several parts to hosting a slot:

 - Filling a slot
 - Proving
 - Repairing a slot
 - Collecting Request's reward and collateral

### Filling slot

When new Request is created `StorageRequested(requestId, ask, expiry)` event is emitted with following properties: 

 - `requestId` - ID of Request.
 - `ask` - Specification of Request parameters. For details see above.
 - `expiry` - Unix timestamp that specifies when the Request will be cancelled if all slots are not filled by then.

It is then up to the Storage Provider node to decide based on the emitted parameters if it wants to participate in the 
Request and try to fill its slot(s). This decision SHOULD be done based on parameters specified by the node operator.
If the node decides to ignore this Request, no action is necessary. If the node wants to try to fill a a slot, then 
it MUST follow the remaining steps.

> Node MUST decide which Slot specified by slot's index it wants to try to fill in. Node MAY try filling multiple
> slots. In order to fill a slot, node first MUST download the slot's data using slot's root that can be retrieved
> from Manifest specified in `request.content.cid` (**TODO: Manifest RFC**). 
> This Request object can be retrieved from the smart contract using `getRequest(requestId)`.
> Then the node MUST generate proof over the downloaded data (**TODO: Proving RFC**).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Node MUST decide which Slot specified by slot's index it wants to try to fill in. The Node MAY try filling multiple
slots. In order to fill a slot, the node MUST first download the slot's data using the CID of the manifest (**TODO: Manifest RFC**) and the index of  the slot. The CID is  specified in `request.content.cid`, which can be retrieved from the smart contract using `getRequest(requestId)`.
Then the node MUST generate a proof over the downloaded data (**TODO: Proving RFC**).
```

> Then the node MUST generate proof over the downloaded data (**TODO: Proving RFC**).

Reviewer 4: It also needs to get the challenge and merkleRoot from the contract as inputs to the prover.

> When proof is ready it then MUST create transaction for smart contract call `fillSlot()` with following REQUIRED:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the proof is ready it then MUST create a transaction for smart contract call `fillSlot()` with following REQUIRED:
```

 
 - Parameters:
   - `requestId` - ID of the Request.
   - `slotIndex` - Index that the node is trying to fill.
   - `proof` - `Groth16Proof` proof structure, generated over the slot's data.
 - The Ethereum address of the node from which the transaction originates MUST have [approval](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/api/token/erc20#IERC20-approve-address-uint256-) for transfer of at least the amount required as collateral for the Request on the ERC20 based token, that the network utilizes.

> If the proof is invalid, or slot was already filled by another node, then the transaction

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the proof is invalid, or the slot was already filled by another node, then the transaction
```

> will revert, otherwise `SlotFilled(requestId, slotIndex)` event is emitted. If the transaction is successful, then the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
will revert, otherwise a `SlotFilled(requestId, slotIndex)` event is emitted. If the transaction is successful, then the
```

> node SHOULD transition into __proving__ state as it will need to submit proof of data possession when prompted by the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
node SHOULD transition into a __proving__ state as it will need to submit proof of data possession when prompted by the
```

contract.

It should be noted that if the node sees the `SlotFilled` emitted for slot that he is downloading the dataset or 
generating proof for, then node SHOULD stop and choose different non-filled slot to try to fill as the chosen slot
was filled by other node.

### Proving

Once a node fills a slot, it MUST periodically, yet non-deterministically provide proof to the smart contract that it 

> stores the data it should. Node SHOULD detect that proof is required using the `isProofRequired(slotId)` or that it will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
stores the data it should. Nodes SHOULD detect that a proof is required using the `isProofRequired(slotId)` or that it will
```

be required using the `willProofBeRequired(slotId)` in case the node is in [downtime](https://github.com/codex-storage/codex-research/blob/41c4b4409d2092d0a5475aca0f28995034e58d14/design/storage-proof-timing.md).

> Once node knows it has to provide a proof it MUST get the proof challenge using `getChallenge(slotId)` which then

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once a node knows it has to provide a proof it MUST get the proof challenge using `getChallenge(slotId)` which then
```

NEEDS to be incorporated into the proof generation as described in Proving RFC (**TODO: Proving RFC**).

> When proof is generated it MUST be submitted with a transaction calling `submitProof(slotId, proof)` function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the proof is generated it MUST be submitted with a transaction calling `submitProof(slotId, proof)` function.
```

#### Slashing

> There is a slashing scheme in place that is orchestrated by the smart contract to incentive correct behavior

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There is a slashing scheme in place that is orchestrated by the smart contract to incentivize correct behavior
```

and proper proof submissions by the storage provider nodes. This scheme is configured on smart contract level and is 
the same for all the participants in the network. The concrete values of this scheme can be obtained by `getConfig()` contract call.

The slashing works in the following way:

 - Node MAY miss at most `config.collateral.slashCriterion` proofs before it is slashed.
 - It is then slashed `config.collateral.slashPercentage` percentage **of the originally asked collateral** (hence the slashing amount is always the same for the given request).

>  - If the number of times the node was slashed reaches above `config.collateral.maxNumberOfSlashes`, then the slot is freed, the remaining of node's collateral is burned and the slot is offered to other nodes for repair. Contract also emits the `SlotFreed(requestId, slotIndex)` event.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 - If the number of times the node was slashed reaches above `config.collateral.maxNumberOfSlashes`, then the slot is freed, the remaining of node's collateral is burned and the slot is offered to other nodes for repair. The Contract also emits the `SlotFreed(requestId, slotIndex)` event.
```

> If the number of concurrent freed slots reaches above the `request.ask.maxSlotLoss`, then the dataset is lost and the Request is failed. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the number of concurrent freed slots reaches above the `request.ask.maxSlotLoss`, then the dataset is assumed to be lost and the Request is failed. 
```

The collateral of all the nodes that hosted Request's slots is burned and the event `RequestFailed(requestId)` is emitted.

### Repair

> When slot is freed because of too many missed proofs, which SHOULD be detected by listening on the `SlotFreed(requestId, slotIndex)` event, then

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a slot is freed because of too many missed proofs, which SHOULD be detected by listening on the `SlotFreed(requestId, slotIndex)` event, then
```

> storage provider node can decide if it wants to participate in the repairing of the slot. The node SHOULD, similarly like with slot's filling,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
storage provider node can decide if it wants to participate in the repairing of the slot. The node SHOULD, similar to filling a slot,
```

consider the node's operator configuration when making the decision. The storage provider node that originally hosted
the freed slot MAY also participate in the data repair, but my refilling the slot it **won't** recover its original collateral
and needs to submit new collateral with the `fillSlot()` call.

> The repair process is the same as with the filling slots, with one difference that the node MUST use the erasure coding to 

Reviewer 4: It's not really a MUST. If the data is still cached somewhere in the network, then it's perfectly fine to download it instead of reconstructing.

reconstruct the original dataset. As this requires retrieving more data of the dataset from the network, the node that 

> will successfully repair slot by filling the freed slot will be granted additional reward. (**TODO: Implementation**)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
will successfully repair slot by filling the freed slot will be granted an additional reward. (**TODO: Implementation**)
```

The repair process is then as follows:

1. Node detects `SlotFreed` event and decide to repair it.
1. Node MUST download the required chunks and MUST use the [Reed-Soloman algorithm](https://hackmd.io/FB58eZQoTNm-dnhu0Y1XnA) to reconstruct the original slot's data.
1. Node MUST generate proof over the reconstructed data.
1. Node MUST submit transaction with call to `fillSlot()` with the same parameters and collateral allowance as described in the [Filling slot](#filling-slot).

### Collecting funds

> Storage Provider node SHOULD monitor Requests and slots it hosts. In case it needs to discover what slots it is hosting,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A Storage Provider node SHOULD monitor Requests and slots it hosts. In case it needs to discover what slots it is hosting,
```

> for example, because the node had to restart, then it SHOULD use the contract call `mySlots()`, which returns array of `SlotID`s

Reviewer 4: Same as for `myRequests()`, just not sure whether we should spec it.

associated with the Ethereum address from which the contract call originates. This list is kept up to date by the smart contract itself.

> When node slot's Requests reaches states `Cancelled`, `Finished` or `Failed` it SHOULD call the contract's `freeSlot(slotId)` function.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a node slot's Requests reaches states `Cancelled`, `Finished` or `Failed` it SHOULD call the contract's `freeSlot(slotId)` function.
```

These states can be detected using:

 - `Cancelled` state MAY be detected by setting timeout using `expiry` **and** not detecting `RequestFulfilled(requestId)` event. There is also `RequestCancelled` event emitted, but the node SHOULD NOT use it for asserting expiry as it is not guaranteed to be emitted at the time of expiry.
 - `Finished` state MAY be detected by setting timeout specified from function `getRequestEnd(requestId)`.
 - `Failed` state MAY be detected by listening to the `RequestFailed(requestId)` event emitted.

For each of these states, different funds are collected:

- For `Cancelled` the collateral is returned together with proportional payout based on time that the node actually hosted the dataset before expiry was reached.
- For `Finished` the full reward for hosting the slot together with collateral is gathered.
- For `Failed` no funds are collected as reward is returned to the client and collateral is burned, but this call removes the slot from the `mySlots()` tracking.

## Validator role

> Validator role represents nodes that verify that the Storage Provider nodes submit proofs when they are required.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps it's good to explicitly mention that the validator doesn't validate anything. It's the contract that does the actual validation that a proof is missing, it only needs the validator to invoke the contract in a timely manner.

> This is because in blockchain we cannot act on things that **do not happen** and somebody needs to create a transaction 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is because in a blockchain we cannot act on things that **do not happen** and somebody needs to create a transaction 
```

in order for the smart contract to act on it. The validator nodes get then rewarded for each time they correctly
mark proof as missing.

Validator nodes MUST observe the slot's space by listening on the `SlotFilled` event, which SHOULD prompt the validator

> to add the slot to the watched slots. Then after the end of every period validator has at most `config.proofs.timeout` seconds

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to add the slot to the watched slots. Then after the end of every period a validator has at most `config.proofs.timeout` seconds
```
